Achilles tendinopathy. Formerly called tendinitis, this is chronic degenerative changes to the Achilles tendon. That's the large tendon that attaches the calf to the back of the heel. Achilles tendinitis causes pain or burning and stiffness in the area of the tendon, especially in the morning and with activity. It is usually caused by repetitive stress to the tendon. Adding too much distance to your running routine can cause it. Tight calf muscles can also contribute.
Achilles tendonitis occurs when the tendon that connects the back of your leg to your heel becomes swollen and painful near the bottom of the foot. There are two large muscles in the calf. These create the power needed to push off with the foot or go up on the toes. The large Achilles tendon connects these muscles to the heel and allows you to push your foot down. You use your Achilles tendon when walking, running, and jumping. Tendonitis due to overuse is most common in younger people. It can occur in walkers, runners, or other athletes. Tendonitis from arthritis is more common in middle-aged and older adults. The symptoms of achilles tendonitis include: Pain in the heel and along the length of the tendon when walking or running, Pain and stiffness in the area in the morning, Pain in the achilles tendon when touched or moved, Swelling and warmth in the heel or along the tendon, Difficulty standing up on one toe. Your health care provider will first perform a physical exam. Your doctor will look for tenderness along the tendon and pain in the area of the tendon when you stand on your toes. X-rays can help diagnose bone problems, and an MRI scan may be done if you are considering surgery or there is a chance that you have a tear in the Achilles tendon. (Penn Medicine)
Tendinitis usually responds well to self-care measures. But if your signs and symptoms are severe or persistent, your doctor might suggest other treatment options. If over-the-counter pain medications — such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) or naproxen (Aleve) — aren't enough, your doctor might prescribe stronger medications to reduce inflammation and relieve pain. A physical therapist might suggest some of the following treatment options: Therapists often prescribe specific stretching and strengthening exercises to promote healing and strengthening of the Achilles tendon and its supporting structures; A special type of strengthening called "eccentric" strengthening, involving a slow let down of a weight after raising it, has been found to be especially helpful for persistent Achilles problems; A shoe insert or wedge that slightly elevates your heel can relieve strain on the tendon and provide a cushion that lessens the amount of force exerted on your Achilles tendon; If several months of more-conservative treatments don't work or if the tendon has torn, your doctor may suggest surgery to repair your Achilles tendon. (Mayo Clinic)
