Runner's knee. This is a common overuse injury. Runner's knee (often called Patellofemoral syndrome) has several different causes. It often happens when your kneecap is out of alignment.
Patellofemoral pain syndrome (PFPS), also known as runner's knee, means that you have pain in front of the knee or around the kneecap (patella). This is where the knee connects with the lower end of the thighbone (femur). Patellofemoral pain syndrome may be caused by a structural defect, or a certain way of walking or running. Other causes may include: Malalignment of the kneecap, Excessive training or overuse, Injury or trauma, Weak thigh muscles, Tight hamstrings, Tight Achilles tendons, Poor foot support, Walking or running with the feet rolling in while the thigh muscles pull the kneecap outward. These are the most common symptoms of runner's knee: Pain in and around the kneecap that happens when you are active, Pain after sitting for a long time with the knees bent, This sometimes causes weakness or feelings of instability, Rubbing, grinding, or clicking sound of the kneecap that you hear or feel when you bend and straighten your knee, Kneecap that is tender to the touch, The symptoms of runner's knee may look like other conditions and health problems. Always talk with your healthcare provider for a diagnosis. Treatment will depend on your symptoms, age, and general health. It will also depend on how bad the condition is. The best course of treatment is to stop running until you can run again without pain. Treatment is aimed at relieving pain and increasing strength and range of motion. Treatments may include: Strengthening exercises, Stretching exercises, Cold packs, Elevating the leg, Compression knee wrap, Medicines, such as ibuprofen, Shoe inserts (orthotics), Knee bracing, Patellofemoral taping. Preventing PFPS includes not overstressing your knees. You can do this by: Maintaining a healthy body weight, Warming up before physical activity, Stretching before and after physical activity, Increasing your activities gradually, Wearing shoes appropriate for your physical activities, Running leaning forward with your knees bent. (Johns Hopkins Medicine)
