Stress fracture. This is a small crack in a bone that causes pain and discomfort. It typically affects runners in the shin and feet. It's often due to working too hard before your body gets used to a new activity.
A stress fracture is a very small, fine break in the bone as a result of continuous overuse. Stress fractures often occur in the foot after training for basketball, running and other sports. While stress fractures can occur in many bones that are subjected to repetitive activities, the bones of the legs and feet are at greatest risk. The bones in the midfoot (metatarsals) in runners are especially vulnerable to stress fractures. Stress fractures can happen for many reasons including: Increasing the amount or intensity of an activity too quickly, especially if the activity is new. This is the most common cause of stress fractures. One example is increasing training time; Changing training conditions, like switching to a tennis court with a different surface material or running on pavement instead of grass; Using improper footwear for the activity, such as running in worn-out shoes. A stress fracture may not cause obvious swelling. But symptoms can occur a bit differently in each person. Symptoms may include: Pain in the front of the foot, often after long or intense bouts of exercise; Pain that goes away after exercise, then returns when exercise is continued. The symptoms of stress fractures can be like other health conditions. Always see your doctor for a diagnosis. Treatment is aimed at relieving pain and giving the fracture time to heal, usually around six to eight weeks. Specific treatment for a stress fracture will depend on: Your age, overall health and health history; Severity of the injury; How well you can handle certain medicines, procedures and therapies; How long your injury is expected to last; Your opinion or preference. Treatment may include: Rest, Protection of the fracture site with reduced weight-bearing, Cold packs, Medicine such as ibuprofen, Shock-absorbing shoes to use during exercise, Running on soft surfaces, such as grass, Physical therapy, Switching to a less stressful activity, such as swimming or biking, Wearing a brace or cast. There are several ways to help prevent stress fractures. These include: Setting incremental goals, building toward bigger goals over time; Cross-training and performing other activities that complement your regular training (for example, adding flexibility and strength training to a running program); Eating a healthy diet that includes calcium and vitamin D; Using good equipment (for example, running footwear that offers good support). (Johns Hopkins Medicine)
